.\" lumi.1 : manual page for lumiMUX
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Jon Mayo
.\" Licensed under MIT-0 OR PUBLIC DOMAIN
.TH LUMI 1 "2026-05-09" "lumiMUX" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
lumi \- terminal multiplexer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lumi
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lumi
is a terminal multiplexer with a git-style sub-command architecture.
Each sub-command can also be invoked directly as
.BI lumi- command
(e.g.\&
.BR lumi-new ).
.PP
If no command is given,
.B lumi
prints usage information and exits.
.SH COMMON OPTIONS
The following options are accepted by most sub-commands:
.TP
.BI \-s " name"
Session name.
Defaults to
.B 0
if not specified.
.TP
.BI \-m " mode"
UI mode:
.BR screen " (default),"
.BR turbo ,
.BR minimal .
Accepted by
.B new
and
.BR attach .
.SH COMMANDS
.SS lumi new
Create a new session and attach to it.
.PP
.B lumi new
.RB [ \-A ]
.RB [ \-d ]
.RB [ "\-f window" ]
.RB [ "\-m mode" ]
.RB [ "\-s name" ]
.RI [ shell ]
.TP
.B \-A
If the session already exists, reattach to it instead of failing.
.TP
.B \-d
Detach mode.
Create the session and start the server but do not attach.
.TP
.BI \-f " window"
Focus the given window (by server PID) after startup.
Passed through to
.BR lumi-attach .
.TP
.BI \-m " mode"
UI mode passed to
.BR lumi-attach .
.TP
.BI \-s " name"
Session name (default:
.BR 0 ).
.TP
.I shell
Shell command to run inside the new session.
Uses the user's login shell if omitted.
.SS lumi attach
Attach to an existing session.
.PP
.B lumi attach
.RB [ "\-f window" ]
.RB [ "\-m mode" ]
.RB [ "\-s name" ]
.RI [ name ]
.TP
.BI \-f " window"
Focus the given window (by server PID) after startup.
.TP
.BI \-m " mode"
UI mode:
.BR screen " (default),"
.BR turbo ,
.BR minimal .
.TP
.BI \-s " name"
Session name (default:
.BR 0 ).
A positional argument may also be used.
.PP
Remote sessions may be specified using scp-style syntax:
.PP
.RS 4
.RI [ user @ ] host : session
.RE
.PP
When a remote session name is given,
.B lumi attach
launches
.B lumi proxy
on the remote host via
.BR ssh (1)
and tunnels all window I/O over the SSH connection.
If the session part is omitted (e.g.\&
.IR host: ),
it defaults to
.BR 0 .
Names beginning with
.B /
or
.B .
are always treated as local.
.SS lumi detach
Detach a client from its session.
.PP
.B lumi detach
.RB [ "\-s name" ]
.TP
.BI \-s " name"
Session name (default:
.BR 0 ).
.SS lumi kill
Terminate a session.
.PP
.B lumi kill
.RB [ "\-s name" ]
.TP
.BI \-s " name"
Session name (default:
.BR 0 ).
.SS lumi list
List active sessions.
.PP
.B lumi list
.PP
Takes no options.
.SS lumi new\-window
Create a new window in an existing session.
.PP
.B lumi new\-window
.RB [ "\-s name" ]
.RI [ shell ]
.TP
.BI \-s " name"
Session name (default:
.BR 0 ).
.TP
.I shell
Shell command to run in the new window.
.SS lumi attr
Get, set, delete, or list per-session attributes.
.PP
.B lumi attr
.RB [ "\-s name" ]
.B get
.I key
.br
.B lumi attr
.RB [ "\-s name" ]
.B set
.I key value
.br
.B lumi attr
.RB [ "\-s name" ]
.B delete
.I key
.br
.B lumi attr
.RB [ "\-s name" ]
.B list
.TP
.BI \-s " name"
Session name.
Defaults to the
.B LUMI_SESSION
environment variable, or
.B 0
if unset.
.SS lumi splash
Display an ANSI art splash screen.
.PP
.B lumi splash
.RI [ scene ]
.RI [ name ]
.TP
.I scene
One of
.BR space ,
.BR mountain ,
or
.BR beach .
Chosen at random if omitted.
.TP
.I name
Text displayed on the splash screen (default:
.BR lumiMUX ).
.SS lumi version
Print version information.
.PP
.B lumi version
.PP
Takes no options.
.SS lumi reload
Reload server configuration.
.PP
.B lumi reload
.PP
Not yet implemented.
.SS lumi send\-keys
Send keystrokes to a session.
.PP
.B lumi send\-keys
.PP
Not yet implemented.
.SS lumi send\-input
Send raw input to a pane.
.PP
.B lumi send\-input
.PP
Not yet implemented.
.SH INTERNAL COMMANDS
.SS lumi\-mserver
Single-PTY micro-server process.
Started automatically by
.BR "lumi new" " and " "lumi new\-window" ;
not intended for direct use.
.PP
.B lumi\-mserver
.B \-s
.I name
.RI [ shell ]
.TP
.BI \-s " name"
Session name (required).
.TP
.I shell
Shell command to run.
.SS lumi proxy
Multiplexing proxy for remote session tunneling.
Launched automatically by
.B lumi attach
for remote sessions; not intended for direct use.
The proxy connects to all micro-servers in the specified session,
multiplexes their I/O onto a single pipe (stdin/stdout),
and watches for new or removed windows.
.PP
.B lumi proxy
.B \-s
.I session
.TP
.BI \-s " session"
Session name (required).
.SH KEY BINDINGS
All key bindings use a prefix key (default:
.BR Ctrl\-A )
followed by a second key.
Press the prefix key twice to send a literal
.B Ctrl\-A
to the terminal.
.PP
.TS
l l.
Key	Action
_
c, C	Create new window
k, K	Kill current window
n, Space, Ctrl\-Space, Ctrl\-N	Next window
p, Ctrl\-P	Previous window
0\-9	Select window by number
d, D	Detach from session
w, "	Window list
s	Toggle status bar
q	Applications menu
[, Escape	Enter scrollback mode
h	Split pane horizontally
v	Split pane vertically
Tab	Next pane
X	Close pane
r	Resize pane
t	Toggle between turbo and screen modes
m	Minimize window (turbo mode)
f	Maximize window (turbo mode)
P	Window color picker (turbo mode)
S	Toggle scroll lock
I	Toggle input lock
U	Session picker
]	Paste from internal clipboard
y	Sync internal clipboard to system
.TE
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration file is loaded from:
.PP
.RS 4
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lumi/lumi.conf
.RE
.PP
or, if
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is not set:
.PP
.RS 4
.I $HOME/.config/lumi/lumi.conf
.RE
.PP
The file is optional; a missing file is silently ignored.
.SS Format
The file uses a git-config-style INI format.
Section headers are enclosed in brackets.
Keys and values are separated by
.BR = .
Lines starting with
.B #
or
.B ;
are comments.
Inline comments (after a value) are also supported.
Double-quoted values preserve literal
.B #
characters.
.PP
Dotted shorthand may be used outside a section block:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
status.position = bottom
.fi
.RE
.PP
is equivalent to:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[status]
position = bottom
.fi
.RE
.SS Keys
.TP
.B attach.mode
Default UI mode:
.BR screen " (default),"
.BR turbo ,
.BR minimal .
Overridden by the
.B \-m
command-line flag.
.TP
.B keys.prefix
Change the prefix key.
Accepts
.BR C\- \fIx\fR
notation or a named key (see
.B Key Names
below).
Default:
.BR C\-a .
.TP
.B status.format
Status bar format string.
Supports variable expansion and built-in functions.
.TP
.B status.position
Status bar position:
.BR top " or " bottom .
Default:
.BR top .
.TP
.B status.shell_allow
Comma-separated
.BR fnmatch (3)
patterns for shell commands allowed in status bar
.B $(shell ...)
expansions.
.TP
.B ui.theme
Name of the theme to use for turbo mode window decorations.
.SS Bindings
Key bindings are declared in a
.B [bind]
section.
Each entry maps a key name to an action name.
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[bind]
b = prev\-window
.fi
.RE
.PP
To unbind a key, set its action to
.BR none .
.PP
Named binding layers activate based on predicates and are
declared with a subsection name:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[bind "vi"]
match\-title = ^vim
j = next\-window
k = prev\-window
.fi
.RE
.PP
Layer directives:
.TP
.B match\-title
POSIX extended regular expression matched against the window title.
The layer activates when the focused window title matches.
.TP
.B toggle
Named toggle.
The layer activates when the toggle is enabled.
.SS Key Names
Key names used in
.B keys.prefix
and
.B [bind]
entries:
.TP
.BI C\- x
Control key.
.I x
may be
.BR a \- z ,
.BR A \- Z ,
or
.BR @ \- _ .
.TP
.B space
Space character.
.TP
.B tab
Tab key.
.TP
.BR escape ", " esc
Escape key.
.TP
.B backspace
Backspace (DEL, 0x7f).
.TP
.B quote
Double-quote character.
.TP
.I c
Any single ASCII character (e.g.\&
.BR a ", " 0 ", " [ ).
.SS Action Names
.TS
l l.
Action	Description
_
send\-prefix	Send literal prefix key
new\-window	Create new window
next\-window	Next window
prev\-window	Previous window
select\-0 \- select\-9	Select window by number
kill\-window	Kill current window
detach	Detach from session
window\-list	Show window list
status\-toggle	Toggle status bar
apps\-menu	Applications menu
split\-h	Split horizontally
split\-v	Split vertically
next\-pane	Next pane
prev\-pane	Previous pane
close\-pane	Close pane
resize\-pane	Resize pane
scrollback	Enter scrollback mode
window\-colors	Window color picker
minimize	Minimize window
maximize	Maximize window
toggle\-mode	Toggle between turbo and screen modes
scroll\-lock	Toggle scroll lock
input\-lock	Toggle input lock
session\-list	Session picker
paste	Paste from internal clipboard
clipboard\-sync	Sync internal clipboard to system
none	Unbind key
.TE
.SH SCROLLBACK MODE
Enter scrollback mode with
.B Ctrl\-A [
or
.BR "Ctrl\-A Escape" .
In scrollback mode:
.TP
.BR "Up" ", " "Down" ", " "Page Up" ", " "Page Down"
Scroll through history.
.TP
.B Mouse wheel
Scroll up and down.
.TP
.B Mouse drag
Select text.
Selected text is copied to the internal clipboard on mouse release.
.TP
.BR q ", " Escape
Exit scrollback mode.
.PP
A scrollbar is displayed on the right edge of the window in turbo mode.
Selection highlighting is constrained to the visible window bounds.
.SH MOUSE
In
.B turbo
mode, mouse interactions include:
.TP
.B Title bar drag
Move window.
.TP
.B Border drag
Resize window.
.TP
.B Close button click
Close window.
.TP
.B Click
Focus window and deliver click to the application.
.PP
In all modes, mouse text selection copies to the internal clipboard.
Use
.B Ctrl\-A ]
to paste and
.B Ctrl\-A y
to sync the internal clipboard to the system clipboard.
.PP
Bracketed paste sequences from the outer terminal are forwarded to
the focused window when the application has enabled bracketed paste
mode (DECSET 2004).
.SH TERMINAL COMPATIBILITY
.B lumi
sets the host terminal's title to reflect the current window title.
Title changes from child applications (via OSC 0 and OSC 2) are
propagated to the outer terminal immediately.
.PP
Window layout (positions, sizes, z-order) is saved on detach and
restored on reattach to the same session.
.PP
The following terminal features are recognized and forwarded:
.TP
.B Kitty keyboard protocol
The prefix key (Ctrl\-A) is recognized in kitty keyboard encoding
(CSI 97;5u) in addition to the traditional byte encoding.
.TP
.B Keyboard enhancement protocols
Enhancement flags (XTPUSHSGR, kitty progressive enhancement) set by
child applications are forwarded from the micro-server to the outer
terminal.
.TP
.B DCS pass-through
SIXEL graphics and other DCS sequences are passed through to the
outer terminal when a single pane is focused in screen mode.
.TP
.B Cursor shape
DECSCUSR (CSI Ps SP q) cursor shape changes are forwarded.
.SH SECURITY
.B lumi
sets
.BR umask (2)
to 077 at startup so that the runtime directory
.RI ( $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/lumi/ )
and its Unix domain sockets are accessible only by the owning user.
The original umask is restored for child shell processes.
.PP
The session directory is cleaned of stale entries (dead server
processes) on each attach and list operation.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LUMI_SESSION
Set inside an attached session to the current session name.
Prevents recursive attach.
Used by
.B lumi attr
as the default session name when
.B \-s
is not given.
.TP
.B LUMI_LIBEXEC_PATH
Override the search path for
.BI lumi- command
executables.
.TP
.B LUMI_DEBUG
Set to a file path to enable debug tracing.
Diagnostic output is appended to the specified file.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR screen (1),
.BR tmux (1),
.BR ssh (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Jon Mayo
